Revise Nextflow integration docs (#869)
seqeralabs/wave: docs/nextflow.mdx

title: Nextflow integration
---

You can use Wave directly from your Nextflow pipelines. Nextflow integration with Wave supports private repositories, container freezing, and conda packages.

:::note
Nextflow integration with Wave requires Nextflow 22.10.0, or later.
:::

## Get started

To enable Wave in your Nextflow pipeline, add the following to your Nextflow configuration file:

```groovy
wave.enabled = true
tower.accessToken = '<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>'
```

> Replace `<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>` with your Seqera Platform access token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>` with your Platform access token.
```

> Using a Seqera access token is optional but provides additional capabilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Using a Platform access token is optional but provides additional capabilities:
```

- Access to private repositories
- Higher API request limits than anonymous users

For all Nextflow configuration options, see [Configuration options](#configuration-options).

## Use Wave features with Nextflow

The following sections describe how to use Wave features with Nextflow.

### Access private container repositories

Use Wave to access private repositories in your Nextflow pipelines. Provide your repository access keys as [Seqera Platform credentials](https://docs.seqera.io/platform/latest/credentials/overview).

<details open>
<summary>**Access private container repositories**</summary>

To access private container repositories, add your [Platform access token](https://docs.seqera.io/platform/latest/api/overview#authentication) to your Nextflow configuration file.

```groovy
tower.accessToken = '<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>'
```

Replace `<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>` with your Seqera Platform access token.

> If you created credentials in a Seqera Platform organization workspace, also add your workspace ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you created credentials in an organization workspace, also add your workspace ID:
```

:::note
If a process declares a `container` directive, it takes precedence over the Dockerfile definition.
:::

To use the Dockerfile in the module directory, even when a process uses a `container` directive, add the following to your Nextflow configuration file:

```groovy
wave.strategy = ['dockerfile','container']
```

:::warning
Wave does not support `ADD`, `COPY`, or other Dockerfile commands that access files in the host file system.
:::

</details>

### Build conda-based containers

Wave can provision containers based on the [`conda` directive](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#conda).
This allows you to use conda packages in your pipeline, even on cloud-native platforms like AWS Batch and Kubernetes, which do not support the conda package manager directly.

<details open>
<summary>**Build conda-based containers**</summary>

Define the `conda` requirements in your pipeline processes.
Ensure the process doesn't include a `container` directive or Dockerfile.

To prioritize `conda` over `container` directives and Dockerfiles, add the following to your Nextflow configuration:

```groovy
wave.strategy = ['conda']
```

> Replace `<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>` with your Seqera Platform access token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<PLATFORM_ACCESS_TOKEN>` with your Platform access token.
```

This can simplify and speed up operations on local, AWS Batch, Google Batch, or Kubernetes executions.

For more information, see:
- [Fusion documentation](https://docs.seqera.io/fusion)
- [Nextflow Fusion integration documentation](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/fusion.html)

</details>

## Configuration options

The following Nextflow configuration options are available:

| Method                       | Description                                                                                                                                                              |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `wave.enabled`               | Enable/disable the execution of Wave containers                                                                                                                          |
| `wave.endpoint`              | The Wave service endpoint (default: `https://wave.seqera.io`)                                                                                                            |

> | `wave.build.repository`      | The container repository where images built by Wave are uploaded. You must provide corresponding credentials in your Seqera Platform account.                            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `wave.build.repository`      | The container repository where images built by Wave are uploaded. You must provide corresponding credentials in your Platform account.                            |
```

> | `wave.build.cacheRepository` | The container repository used to cache image layers built by the Wave service. You must provide corresponding credentials in your Seqera Platform account.               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `wave.build.cacheRepository` | The container repository used to cache image layers built by the Wave service. You must provide corresponding credentials in your Platform account.               |
```

| `wave.conda.mambaImage`      | The Mamba container image used to build conda-based containers. This should be a [micromamba-docker](https://github.com/mamba-org/micromamba-docker) image.              |
| `wave.conda.commands`        | One or more commands to add to the Dockerfile used to build a conda-based image.                                                                                         |
| `wave.strategy`              | The strategy used when resolving ambiguous Wave container requirements (default: `'container,dockerfile,conda'`)                                                         |
| `wave.freeze`                | When `freeze` mode is enabled, containers provisioned by Wave are stored permanently in the repository specified by `wave.build.repository`.                             |

## Limitations

> ### Use of sha256 digest in the image name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use of SHA256 digest in the image name
```

> Wave does not support using a sha256 digest in the image name (for example, `ubuntu@sha256:3235...ce8f`) when using the augmentation process to extend container images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wave does not support using an SHA256 digest in the image name (for example, `ubuntu@sha256:3235...ce8f`) when using the augmentation process to extend container images.
```
